*Document number:* D0800R0

*Date:* 2017-08-28

*Audience:* Evolution Working Group

*Reply-to:* Christopher Di Bella <christopher@codeplay.com>

# The Concepts TS improves upon C++

## Abstract

There is concern that the Concepts TS does not improve C++, and that it might not be necessary.
This paper addresses some concerns, and considers why having and using (but not necessarily writing)
concepts is beneficial to the average C++ programmer.

## Contents

1. Introduction
2. Definitions
3. Error messages with Concepts and Ranges
4. Generic programming in C++17
5. Generic programming with Concepts
6. Conclusion
7. Thanks
8. References

## Introduciton

This paper addresses some of the concerns that some programmers have about whether the Concepts TS
contributes to the C++ programming language.

### Definitions

* **Modern C++** refers to any C++ Standard published since 2011.
* **Concepts TS** is shorthand for _ISO/IEC TS 19217:2015, Programming Languages
  -- C++ Extensions for Concepts_.
* **Concepts** is shorthand for the Concepts TS
* **concept** refers to an individual `concept` written in code
* **Ranges TS** is shorthand for _N4685, Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Ranges_.
* **Ranges** is shorthand for the Ranges TS.
* **Novice C++ programmer** (or some variant) refers to a C++ programmer with less than three years
  experience with modern C++.
* **Average C++ programmer** (or some variant) refers to a C++ programmer with three or more years
  experience with modern C++.
* **Expert C++ programmer** (or some variant) refers to a C++ programmer that satisfies at least one
  of the following criteria:
  1. attends WG21-related meetings (e.g. this meeting)
  2. attends WG21-related calls (e.g. SG14 telecons)
  3. contributes to Standard proposal papers
  4. contributes to a modern C++ compiler (e.g. GCC)
  5. contributes to a modern C++ Standard Library (e.g. libc++)
  6. contributes to a modern C++ library similar to the Standard Library (e.g. Boost, range-v3, etc.)
  7. contributes to a reference implementation for a Standard proposal or Technical Specification
     (e.g. cmcstl2)
  8. has ten or more years experience with C++, particularly with templates, including template
     metaprogramming (includes using Boost.MPL)
* **Clang** or **LLVM** refer to the C++ implementation of LLVM 5.
  * **libc++** refers to the LLVM implementation of the C++ Standard Library,
    provided by the flag `-stdlib=libc++` to Clang.
* **GCC** refers to the C++ implementation of GCC 7.
  * **libstdc++** refers to the GCC implementation of the C++ Standard Library.
* **MSVC** refers to the C++ implementation of Microsoft Visual C++ 2017.

All code samples are provided through Matt Godbolt's _Compiler Explorer_ for convenience.

## Error messages with Concepts and Ranges

One particular concern is that Concepts do not improve compiler diagnostics. To illustrate, we'll
consider the following two programs:

* Listing 1. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/bEBoK9)
* Listing 2. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/wqgvdH)

Both diagnostics -- on their own and at a first glance -- appear to be expert-friendly. Both are
incredibly verbose, which can be indimidating, and the `ranges::sort` is sufficiently more verbose.
This does not mean that it is sufficiently more expert-friendly than `std::sort`: instead, it opens
opportunities for tools to provide more _informative_ diagnostics. At present, this might be using a
third-party tool that only reveals certain text from the diagnostic (e.g. showing only the parts
that match the regular expression "concept bool\W+\w+\W*="); in future, it might be possible for a
compiler to implement a feature that cleans up the diagnostics further.

It's not possible to do this solely with template diagnostics because the template does not contain
the necessary information. The information that is spewed from `std::sort` rambles on about an
`operator-` that the user has not implemented. The only piece of information that is actually
informative is `_RandomAccessIterator`, but this isn't easily findable when using libc++, and there
is no mention of the word 'random' in the diagnostic from MSVC 2017 at all. Since all three major
compilers discuss `operator-`, and only two of them mention 'random' (almost in passing), the
following information can be inferred from the diagnostic:

1. It has something to do with `std::sort` (given that libstdc++ talks about `std::__sort`, libc++
   talks about `std::__1::__insertion_sort`, and MSVC talks about both `std::sort` and
   `std::_Sort_unchecked`).
2. It has something to do with `operator-`

In contrast, `ranges::sort` spews diagnostics regarding the interface for `sort`. There is rambling,
but it explicitly mentions a few key words:

1. `std::experimental::ranges::v1::sort`
2. `concept bool RandomAccessIterator`
3. `concept bool DerivedFrom`
4. `concept bool SizedSentinel`
5. `concept bool StrictTotallyOrdered`
6. `concept bool __totally_ordered`
7. `concept bool RandomAccessIncrementable`
8. `concept bool RandomAccessIterator`
9. `RandomAccessRange and Sortable`

Even most of this is noise, but we get a lot more information. Firstly, there's no mention of
`operator-`, which is an _implementation detail_ of the sort algorithm. This means that we are left
to consider how we interact with our algorithm. The diagnostic provided by the concept also mentions
the term `RandomAccess` four times: this means that we're likely violating some contract that asks
for a random access data structure: this is a topic that is covered in the first year of computer
science at university, or when `std::list` is introduced in a well-written resource (there's no need
to discuss random access and linear access until a non-`vector` container appears).

As previously stated, the diagnostics can be improved upon here: what we currently have is a
prototype.

The quality of diagnostics is a strong motivator for using concepts, but it's not the only reason to
use them. There's more on that below. If the use of concepts served solely as a vehicle to improve
diagnostics, the compiler might not be the tool to grok the diagnostics: we use other tools, such as
IDEs, lint tools, and static analysers. Perhaps one of these can pick up when a compiler struggles
to provide ample documentation. Recall that the Standard does not specify _how_ diagnostics are to
be output -- only that they are -- and users who prefer not to use tools can request better
diagnostics from their compiler vendor.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let's now consider sorting on a type that can't be compared.

* Listing 3. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/5h3NqK)
* Listing 4. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/BQruYa)

Toward the top of both libstdc++ and libc++, we can see that an expression of the form `a < b` is
invalid. MSVC also mentions `std::less<void>`, so we can safely conclude that all three major
implementations of the Standard Library communicate we're falling flat on our faces with a less-than
comparison. Beyond that, there isn't terribly much useful information, and it isn't clear from the
way that it is presented that a lacking `bool operator<(const Foo&, const Foo&)` is the culprit:

1. GCC talks a lot about `{ return *__it1 < *__it2; }`. This snippet of code exposes the
   implementation of `std::sort` to users. Users shouldn't be concerned with a correct
   implementation of `std::sort`; they should be focusing on the contract that they've ignored.
2. LLVM is exempt, its diagnostic is rather clear.
3. MSVC's diagnostics are less clear, but with some squinting, we can see that they are related to
   `Foo`.

The Ranges TS provides vastly different output. The most relevant part of the diagnostic is

```
  concept bool Sortable =
  concept bool IndirectStrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool StrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool Relation =
  concept bool StrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool Relation =
  concept bool StrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool Relation =
  concept bool StrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool Relation =
  concept bool StrictWeakOrder =
  concept bool Relation =
```

To understand what is happening here, we need to understand what it means to be `Sortable`, what a
`StrictWeakOrder` is, and what a `Relation` is. We can look to mathematics for the definition of
both a relation[3][4] and a strict weak order[5][6]. (We discuss `Sortable` in detail later).
`StrictWeakOrder` is also known as the `Compare` concept in the C++ Standard Library.

While it requires programmers to know more terms, these terms remain consistent with the C++
Standard, as opposed to the diagnostics returned from something such as `std::sort`, which may vary
from implementation to implementation.

## Generic programming with Concepts

It has been argued that real-world concepts, such as `Sortable`, are difficult to understand. This
is correct. I do not expect the authors of the Palo Alto TR, nor the authors of the Ranges TS to
disagree either. The mathematics involved is complex and took years to correctly derive (the Palo
Alto TR was published in 2012; the Ranges TS in 2017). The algebra required to employ Standard
algorithms is present regardless of them using concepts -- wildly incorrect code will still violate
the contract, and well-specified concepts can help to _enforce_ said contract.

What the Ranges TS does is provide a _formal_ way for compilers (and other tools) to check if a type
can be sorted, and _clearly_ communicate the requirements of an interface to users. Someone needs to
write `Sortable` -- in fact, it took at least two people to define this, possibly more -- which
means that it's not a trivial requirement to properly pin down. Leaving this in the hands of the
average programmer is not advisable.

Concepts should not be _written_ by average programmers: they only need to _use_ concepts to reap
the benefits of such complex code. A textbook or reference might summarise `Sortable` as

> An iterator is `Sortable` if, and only if, it is mutable and its `value_type` is both `Movable`
and has a strict weak ordering imposed on it.

The terms "mutable", `Movable`, and "strict weak ordering" are all fairly simple to communicate, and
would ideally be introduced well before the definition of the term `Sortable` in a well-designed
course or textbook.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One might wonder if concepts are simple to compose for experts. Again, they are not, and should
not be trivially composable. A descriptive concept isn't written for trivial things such as
`Addable`, `Subtractable`, etc.: `Sortable` aims to mathematically capture the definition of a
sortable type. Spending five years on modelling the requirements for the Standard Library implicitly
suggests that concepts _should not_ be an easy pass.

This demonstrates that even experts shouldn't be writing concepts on their own. They can use them,
knowing that once they've been thoroughly vetted, the code is guaranteed to block things that
shouldn't be used as parameters.

## Generic programming in C++17

Modern C++ offers various tools for expressive generic programming, and some people wonder if these
make concepts redundant. We'll consider them in turn.

1. `std::enable_if`
2. Tag dispatching
3. `constexpr`-`if` statements
4. `constexpr bool`

### `std::enable_if`

`enable_if` is a hacky way to implement concepts at best. `enable_if<Condition, T>` will have a
member alias called `type` if, and only if, `Condition` evaluates to `true`. This provides a way to
leverage SFINAE to conditionally disable template specialisations and overloads. However,
diagnostics will range from [overload resolution failures](https://godbolt.org/g/HVVBwK) to
[incomplete type errors](https://godbolt.org/g/HLyGWy) none of which provide information of _why_
there was a failure.

Concepts, on the other hand, offer a robust mechanism for detecting which requirement isn't
satisfied. This is likely due to the fact that it is a first-class, core language feature. Another
bonus is that it explicitly communicates that a constraint hasn't been satisfied -- something that
is not made clear by our `enable_if` hack!

This can be demonstrated by taking a look at the diagnostics from the following examples.

#### Not `EqualityComparable`

* Listing 5. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/BDxLaT)
* Listing 6. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/WEUwLa)

While it's is possible to work out that `std::regex` isn't `EqualityComparable` when using GCC
(without concepts), it isn't nearly as clear as the concept-equivalent GCC implementation. There are
considerable more diagnostics to decipher, and GCC sells the idea that the problem lies with the
definition of `EqualityComparable`, instead of directing the programmer to understand that
`std::regex` fails to meet the requirements of `Regular`, because it fails to meet the requirements
outlined by `EqualityComparable`.

MSVC identifies that `std::regex` doesn't have an `operator==`, nor an `operator!=`, but it also
spits out a lot of spurious and irrelevant diagnostics.

Clang offers the best non-concept-diagnostics. It also sells the idea that there is a problem with
`EqualityComparable`, but words it in such a way that with experience, one can be able to discern
what is happening. The biggest issue is that it reports the error in reverse -- something that
Concepts fixes.

#### Not `DefaultConstructible`

* Listing 7. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/LFa394)
* Listing 8. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/Vo7Ati)

This is a fairly open-shut case. None of the Concepts-absent compilers report that `Foo` is not a
`Regular` type because it is not `DefaultConstructible`. The Concepts-enabled GCC implementation
does.

#### Not `DefaultConstructible` and not `Copyable`

* Listing 9. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/w755Nh)
* Listsing 10. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/17V9A1)

Again, non-Concepts compilers don't identify why the code is ill-formed. There are a lot of
diagnostics from the Concepts-enabled GCC -- perhaps this can be worked on, but at least it
identifies the problem.

### Tag dispatching

* Listing 11. [Without concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/HhzSrc)
* Listing 12. [With concepts](https://godbolt.org/g/rdxueA)

Listing 11 is a slightly modified version of this example implementation[7] of `std::advance` to
illustrate type traits. This isn't exactly complex code, but it is clunky, and it's possible to
trick the compiler into thinking that we have a tag that we don't really have. It is also very
awkward to call this function: we need to define an object that doesn't really serve any purpose
other than to tell the compiler "call this function".

Listing 12 eliminates all of these problems. It clearly states what the requirements are in the
template header and makes it considerably harder to trick the compiler. Furthermore, we don't need
to have a tag to say "call me!". This makes _using_ constrained functions simpler than their
tag-counterparts.

### `constexpr`-`if` statements

* Listing 13. [Replacing concepts with `constexpr if`](https://godbolt.org/g/dBCJtT)
* Listing 14. [Appropriate use of `constexpr if`](https://godbolt.org/g/9B4NTz)

`constexpr`-`if` statements are a great way to eliminate SFINAE, as are Concepts. One might argue
that the above program could also be written as it is in Listing 13. This is terrible design. We
have combined three different functions, which articulate three different forms of logic, into a
single function that operates on `if`-statements.

`constexpr if`-statements are a powerful tool, that when used correctly, are a great way for
avoiding nasty and obscure SFINAE. This is great in small doses, but it isn't viable for something
where lots of specialised logic is present, or the logic for a specialisation is independent to
another specialisation.

An example of what constitutes as a 'valid' use of `constexpr if` might look like Listing 14. Note
that this is both a contrived and simple approach: a more detailed use-case can be found in the
`accessor` tests for the SYCL 1.2.1 CTS.

The point of this contrived example is to show that `if constexpr` is used to complement the
function: not to completely switch behaviour on a different type, as is demonstrated in the
`advance` port.

This is an example of separating interfaces from implementations. Listing 13 confuses the boundary
between the interface and the implementation that is very clearly provided in Lisiting 12. Listing
14 does no such thing -- enables one features that are very specific to `std::vector`, but it in no
way alters the bulk of the algorithm if we choose to use `std::deque` instead.

### `constexpr bool` objects

Some might argue that the constrained variable declaration syntax can already be achieved by
templated `constexpr bool` objects. For an example, simply visit any of the links to Compiler
Explorer for a non-Concepts-enabled example.

When using them with `enable_if`, they choke out the ability to use automatic type deduction:
perhaps we should write code like so:

```cpp
auto v = std::vector<int>{}; static_assert(Regular<decltype(v)>);
```

Quite frankly, this is far more intrusive than needing to learn about Concepts' constrained variable
syntax, which enables this check, by default; additionally, I wager that it would take a very
dedicated programmer to provide concept checks in such a manner. Then, the code will need to pass a
review, and reviewers mightn't like such code, or understand why it's necessary. Arguing that the
regularity is a part of the type deduction is far simpler, and far more readable.

This also doesn't take contexts where a `static_assert` can't be used directly after the declaration
into consideration. For example, a range-for statement:

```cpp
for (auto i : v) {
  static_assert(Regular<decltype(i)>);
  // ...
}
```

And we haven't looked at reference types. To check that the underlying type of a reference is
regular, we ought to strip the reference part, because `Regular<T&>` doesn't mean the same thing as
`Regular<T>`. To do that, we need to use `std::decay_t`. Or is it `std::remove_reference_t`? What
about when `const` is involved? That's `std::remove_const_t`. Should I just combine all of them
together and hope for the best? Crap, the order matters too.
`std::remove_reference_t<std::remove_const_t<T>>` isn't the same as
`std::remove_const_t<std::remove_reference_t<T>>`. Where does `std::decay` fit in again? Is this
snippet right? Is it _understandable_?

```cpp
for (const auto& i : v) {
   static_assert(Regular<std::remove_const_t<std::remove_reference_t<decltype(i)>>>);
   // ...
}
```

Concepts avoid this issue by going directly to the underlying type, which is checked before the
reference is ever applied. We can use

```cpp
for (const Regular& i : v) {
  // ...
}
```

and _not_ worry about references or `const` types.

Modern C++ programmers shouldn't need to worry about template metaprogramming on a daily basis.
Novices should worry about template metaprogramming even less than average C++ programmers. The
problem is that we thrust template metaprogramming on to non-experts and non-library developers in
contexts that probably do not require such code. Concepts, especially when paired with Ranges, offer
a way to curb high amounts of template metaprogramming. Eric Niebler's
[Range-v3](https://github.com/ericniebler/range-v3/) library offers no such mechanism; it does not
have language support.

## Conclusion

There are arguments that the Concepts TS don't offer anything to simplify generic programming in
C++, but most overlook the fact that the tools we currently have are Hacky-at-Best<sup>TM</sup>.
Arguments made against diagnostics forget that there is only one reference implementation for
Concepts, and that the "complex" diagnostics resulting from said implementation can always be
improved upon.

Concepts do simplify generic programming when used correctly. As someone who works with templates on
a daily basis, tools such as `enable_if` are obscure and tools such as `constexpr if` are not always
the correct answer. To add concepts to the mix is to add:

* a valuable tool that helps reduce the amount of expert-friendly code by banishing complex template
  metaprogramming to concept definitions,
* first-class support for constraint-based type deduction
* offering the opportunity to receive clearer diagnostics
* the choice between `constexpr if` and constrained functions when the situation calls for one or
  the other.

Concepts don't make any of the above features redundant; nor do any of the above features make
Concepts dead-on-arrival. They instead offer programmers the opportunity to choose the correct tool
for the correct problem. Concepts make C++ better.

## References

1. Exon Smith, D. _P0726R0 Does the Concepts TS Improve on C++17?_. 2017-07-07. Retrieved from:
   www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0726r0.html.
2. Muller, J. _Implementation Challenge: Concepts in C++14_. 2017-09-09. Date retrieved: 2017-10-12.
   Retrieved from: http://foonathan.net/blog/2016/09/09/cpp14-concepts.html
3. _Relation (mathematics)_. Date retrieved: 2017-10-06 16:59. Retrieved from:
   https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relation_(mathematics).
4. Wolfram MathWorld. _Relation_. Date retrieved: 2017-10-06. Retrieved from:
   http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Relation.html.
5. _Weak ordering_. Date retrieved: 2017-10-06 17:02. Retrieved from:
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_ordering.
6. Wolfram MathWorld. _Strict Order_. Date retrieved: 2017-10-06. Retrieved from:
   http://mathworld.wolfram.com/StrictOrder.html
7. Stroustrup, B. _The C++ Programming Language_. Fourth edition. 2013.
   Addison-Wesley. Upper Saddle River, NJ.

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank  Simon Brand, Ruyman Reyes, Michael Wong, and Peter Žužek for providing their
feedback on this paper.