# Target-audience tables

## Abstract

Section 4.4 of P1362 uses a form of table that identifies who the target audiences are for certain
parts of coroutine usage. The authors believe that other proposals could drastically benefit from
such tables to help communicate the teachability of proposals and what they believe
beginners-through-experts should be using.

This proposal makes no direct changes to C++, but rather hopes to standardise a new form of
communication between Individual Experts.

## Motivation

P1362 ยง4.4 discussses whether or not coroutines are an expert-only feature. It communicates this --
in part -- by using a table that splits programmers into four categories, as shown in Table 1.

<table>
   <tr>
      <th>Who</th>
      <th>What</th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>Everybody (millions)</td>
      <td>
         Uses coroutines via high level syntax powered by coroutine types and awaitables defined by
         the standard library, boost and other high-quality libraries.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>Power user (10,000)</td>
      <td>
         Aware of <i>Awaitable</i> concept.<br />
         <br />
         Defines new awaitables to customize await for their environment using existing coroutine
         types.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>Expert (1,000)</td>
      <td>
         Aware of <i>Awaitable</i> and <i>Coroutine Promise</i> concepts.<br />
         <br />
         Defines new coroutine types.
      </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>Cream of the crop (200)</td>
      <td>
         Defines metafunctions, utilities and adapters that can help to compose awaitables, write
         utility coroutine adapters, etc.
      </td>
   </tr>
</table>

The authors feel that this table outlining the target audiences for various users both:

1. lets proposal readers distill both the teachability of a proposal and who its intended audience
   actually are;
2. encourages proposal authors to think about their features' target audience(s) and highlights any
   latent 'expert friendliness' of a proposal.

We want to consistently aim for a C++ that is easier to use (e.g. range-based `for`, `auto`, etc.),
and -- as a whole -- want to lower the necessity to be an expert to use C++ (i.e. the millions).
By lowering the barrier for determining who is expected to use a proposed feature, target-audience
tables will bring us closer to that reality.

## Proposal

We strongly suggest that proposal authors begin to use these target-audience tables more frequently
in proposals, just as authors have started to use before-and-after tables (colloquially known as
'Tony Tables' within the committee).
